error correction is the most important
method in technology and learning in
general
in biological evolution it appears to be
the only means of progress
one rightly speaks of the trial and
error method but this understates the
importance of mistakes or errors
of the erroneous trial
all life is problem solving all
organisms are inventors and technicians
good or not so good successful or not so
successful in solving technical problems
this is how it is among animals spiders
for example
human technology solves human problems
such as sewage disposal or the storage
and supply of food and water as for
example bees already have to do
hostility to technology such as we often
find among the greens is therefore a
foolish kind of hostility to life itself
which the greens have unfortunately not
realized
but the critique of technology is not
foolish of course it is urgently
necessary everyone is capable of it in
their different ways and most welcome to
contribute
and since criticism is an occupational
skill of technologists the critique of
technology is a constant preoccupation
of theirs
karl popper from the essay all life is
problem solving from the book of the
same title or life is problem solving
so welcome to top cast and episode 90 i
think certainly part two of chapter
three problem solving in the fabric of
reality and i began there with what karl
popper had to say about problem solving
namely all life is problem solving and
what i understand he meant by this is
not only that every single thing in a
human life is about problem solving you
are continually trying to solve
different problems that's not only a way
in which to avoid suffering the bad
things in life but also a way in which
to enjoy life if you had a situation
where you had no problems or you weren't
trying to solve anything then as david
deutsch says in the beginning of
infinity the other name for a
problem-free state is death we are
constantly trying to solve the problem
of how to be warmer and more comfortable
how to be more interested or interesting
what to do next is often a problem for
us how to solve a particular scientific
problem how to go about our work lives
how to go about our family and social
lives how to get out of pandemics and
difficult situations we find ourselves
in how to find out which of the
interesting things and opportunities
that we have before us might be best for
us to pursue but of course it's not only
about humans it's about every single
living organism so we can also take all
life is problem-solving too that's
literally what life is trying to do
trying to solve the problem of keeping
itself in existence individual organisms
are kind of trying to do that to some
extent really it's the genes trying to
get themselves replicated however
life whether it's our human lives
personally or life broadly speaking as
broadly as you can conceive it it's
about problem solving and in part one of
my discussion of this chapter we
eventually got to
a universal scheme which i'll put up on
the screen now a universal scheme for
the solving of problems and this scheme
that david is setting out it's a
practical vision for problem solving
it's a universal program of a kind as he
will say this applies to every topic no
matter the subject matter and of course
it applies importantly to people's
personal lives to business to something
like police detective work as well as
science history mathematics philosophy
and so on what separates science in this
scheme is the existence of
crucial experimental testing
so let's pick it up where david writes
quote what i have described so far
applies to all problem solving whatever
the subject matter or techniques of
rational criticism that are involved
scientific problem solving always
includes a particular method of rational
criticism namely experimental testing
where two or more rival theories make
conflicting predictions about the
outcome of an experiment the experiment
is performed and the theory or theories
that made false predictions are
abandoned the very construction of
scientific conjectures is focused on
finding explanations that have
experimentally testable predictions
ideally we are always seeking crucial
experimental tests experiments whose
outcomes whatever they are will falsify
one or more of the contending theories
now to learn more about that idea of
falsifying one or more ideally all the
other rivals leaving only one standing
then consult david's seminal paper
titled in part at least the logic of
experimental tests or my own guide to
the paper which is simply called the
philosophy of science i called it that
because it seemed to me at the time and
it still does that this was the crown
jewel so far as that subject the
philosophy of science is concerned it
takes galileo galilei and his writings
his work on cementi or trials up through
francis bacon who along with the loch
pioneered empiricism through to popper
and his work on demarcation and
conjectural knowledge and finally all
the way up to david deutsch and his hard
to very good explanations and the nature
of what's called a crucial experimental
test okay so let's keep going david
writes
this process is illustrated in figure
3.3 whether or not observations were
involved in the instigating problem
stage 1 and whether or not in stage 2
the contending theories were
specifically designed to be tested
experimentally it is in this critical
phase of scientific discovery stage 3
that experimental tests play the
decisive and characteristic role
that role is to render some of the
contending theories unsatisfactory
by revealing that their explanations
lead to false predictions
that bears repeating
i'll say it again
that role the role of experimental tests
is to render some of the contending
theories unsatisfactory
by revealing that their explanations
lead to false predictions
here i must mention an asymmetry which
is important in the philosophy and
methodology of science
the asymmetry between experimental
refutation and experimental confirmation
whereas an incorrect prediction
automatically renders the underlying
explanation unsatisfactory a correct
prediction says nothing at all about the
underlying explanation okay just pausing
now my reflection when you have this
disagreement between
an experimental result
an incorrect prediction in other words
and the theory itself which makes that
prediction so you have this clash
between an experimental result and a
theory then the underlying explanation
is unsatisfactory now it doesn't mean
that the theory itself is necessarily
logically wrong it means the underlying
explanation which is the explanation of
what's going on in the experiment
coupled with what's going on with the
theory so these two things together
there's a conflict there so the
explanation of the whole thing is
unsatisfactory now the standard way of
understanding this is to of course say
well the experimental result has
falsified the theory and that is
typically how science works but it's
also an ideal about how science works it
could be the case the experiment is
flawed but whatever the case whether the
experiment that's flawed or whether it's
the theory that's flawed the underlying
explanation of the conjunction of those
two things is flawed and that's what
david is saying here now this also bears
repeating okay that last thing that i
read a correct prediction says nothing
at all about the underlying explanation
such an important point
easily missed by lay people in science
but sometimes scientists themselves
there is this asymmetry as david has
said there between experimental
refutation and experimental confirmation
and we might without any loss of meaning
simply add the word apparent there it is
an apparent confirmation whenever you
see a confirmation
after all what does it mean to confirm
something well philosophically at
absolute worst putting in its putting it
in its worst possible light so to speak
confirm or a confirmation could mean
to show as actually being true something
or other so if you confirm a theory by
observation you have shown that theory
to be true like finally true and the way
that people talk
okay i was listening to i know he's not
a scientist but you know somebody who
has studied some philosophy and i think
represents common understandings on this
thing is the comedian ricky gervais now
he talks in this way he talks about
confirming a theory and confirming a
theory is true and knowing that
something is true and so on and so forth
and i think that's i'm just using him
because
that's a good example of the way i think
an overwhelming majority of people think
on these topics and he's someone with
actual philosophical training and
someone who indeed
talks to prominent scientists and others
so it could mean that it could mean that
confirmed means to show something that's
actually true which any prepareian will
of course say well this is impossible
it's an impossible standard so we can
throw confirm into the bin we don't need
it but if i was to try and steal man
that position that confirmed doesn't
need need to mean something like show
absolutely and finally true it could
mean something like
this observation conforms to that theory
and therefore lends credence to it
which is a fancy way of kind of saying
shows it more likely to be true without
showing it finally true
which is of course an inductivist
mistake of a kind
now popper himself in various places
logic of scientific discovery objective
knowledge various other things in places
that he he's written about this he makes
a a big deal about this about the whole
idea of rejecting confirmation and of
course he's right to do so
but
it seems to me that he wants to
still have the word still meet the
media's opposition halfway and so he he
comes up with this word corroborate and
so he uses the word corroborate instead
of confirm
and says well we can use the idea of
experiments that agree with a particular
theory corroborate the theory and of
course if you get a dictionary and you
look up what corroborate means it means
something like confirm so i don't think
it gets him very far because whether
it's confirm or corroborate it seems to
imply some kind of possibility of
support for a theory and you can't
support a theory by which we mean the
theory isn't justified the theory isn't
absolutely true in any way shape or form
the best that i can say for what popper
is saying about corroboration in this
case is that he's kind of talking about
how some theories really do stick their
neck out in a way and then don't get
falsified by experiment which can be
telling you know it says something it's
not completely contentless that
information when a particular theory
makes a risky prediction and gets the
prediction right or rather
doesn't get falsified by the experiment
as the way i would better say it so for
example the classic case of testing how
much light bends during a solar eclipse
you know this eddington's experiment to
distinguish between whether general
relativity is the best theory or
newtonian gravity on on this view about
corroboration you would say well general
relativity is corroborated by the
correct prediction about how much the
light bends
i don't know that it adds that much
given what popper says elsewhere about
how well the best explanation is of
course
general relativity and once that
experiment that crucial test eddington's
experiment refutes
shows as inadequate newton's theory of
gravity therefore we say it falsifies
newton's theory of gravity you don't
need to use this word
confirm corroborate support anything
like that because the only theory you
have left standing is general relativity
there are no rivals it doesn't need
support because heck it's the only one
we've got what more do you want then the
best theory the only theory that is
there before you with regards to what
the nature of gravity is it can do all
the explanatory work that you need and
it can do all the predictive work that
you need until such time as you find a
problem with it so i don't think any of
this is needed again i think that papa's
just um
conceding
a certain amount of ground to his
opponents
politely so that the conversation can
keep on going because
they
of course are absolutely enamored by
this idea of justification and support
and confirmation and so he's thrown them
a bone i suppose
perhaps it'll be good to be able to ask
him the fact is that in many of these
cases we have in the case of gravity we
have an explanation of gravity
an existing best explanation of gravity
emphasis on the and okay there's not
multiple
excellent explanations of gravity
there's one so it doesn't matter how
often it gets corroborated you know it
makes these risky predictions because
it's already the only existing theory so
it doesn't need more support it just is
the theory now is it true is it finally
true no we've been through that of
course it's not finally true it's just
the best it contains some truth about
reality but you know
how does being consistent with
predictions help well
let's go back to the book david ryan's
quote
shoddy explanations that yield correct
predictions to a penny as ufo
enthusiasts conspiracy theorists and
pseudo-scientists of every variety
should but never do bear in mind okay
pausing there just a little comment on
that bit so for example a person who
believes aliens are visiting us will be
able to confirm or corroborate if you
like their belief
that namely the pictures of ufos that
are sometimes published are consistent
with the existence of aliens visiting
earth from another galaxy via spacecraft
that travel beyond the speed of light or
something like that
they don't look for refutations they
look for consistency with their already
existing theory they look for
confirmation now some scientists and
some people who regard themselves as
critical thinkers call this an example
of confirmation bias but of course i
would say it's just the error of
thinking that confirmation is even a
thing at all
many many scientists do indeed think
that
it is a thing and i think that's a kind
of bias of a kind they think that too
much confirmation is a bad thing but
just the right amount of confirmation is
a good thing that's possible supposed to
have a little bit of confirmation but
not too much confirmation then you have
confirmation bias so there's there's
almost like there's an ideal amount of
confirmation on this view bayesian
epistemology
is kind of like this you know it says
that some stuff is a confirmation of the
theory not a finally true confirmation
of a theory just a probabilistic
confirmation of the theory and the more
you have confirmation the more confident
you become that this particular theory
is the correct theory
we don't usually need that because again
we only ever have one good explanation
at any given time and in the rare cases
where we have two then we do a crucial
test ruling out one of them and holding
up the one as the explanation
not the finally true explanation i'm
repeating myself
so whatever the case what we're after
are
refutations where we can get them
not confirmations because confirmation
is impossible back to the book david
writes quote
if a theory about observable events is
untestable that is if no possible
observation would rule it out then it
cannot by itself explain why those
events happen in the way they are
observed to and not in some other way
for example the angel theory of
planetary motion is untestable because
no matter how planets moved that motion
could be attributed to angels therefore
the angel theory cannot explain the
particular motions we see
unless it is supplemented by an
independent theory of how angels move
that is why there is a methodological
rule in science which says that once an
experimentally testable theory has
passed the appropriate tests any less
testable rival theories about the same
phenomena are summarily rejected for
their explanations are bound to be
inferior this rule is often cited as
distinguishing science from other types
of knowledge creation
but if we take the view that science is
about explanations
we see that this rule really is a
special case of something that applies
naturally to all problem solving
theories that are capable of giving more
detailed explanations i'll automatically
preferred that bears repeating again
theories that are capable of giving more
detailed explanations are automatically
preferred they are preferred for two
reasons
one is that a theory that sticks its
neck out by being more specific about
more phenomena
opens up itself and its rifles to more
forms of criticism and therefore has
more chance of taking the
problem-solving process forward the
second is simply that if such a theory
survives the criticism it leaves less
unexplained which is the object of the
exercise
okay pausing there and an example
i'll go to my trope example
newtonian gravity said that gravity is
this force that varies as the product of
the masses involved
divided by the square of the distance
between the masses and in stating
something true about gravity something
approximately true about gravity
it reached beyond whatever newton was
specifically interested in the
particular problem he was interested in
across the whole solar system across the
galaxy
to every single where in the universe
and every single when in the universe it
reached into
how the tides work and how planets moved
and how rocks fell to the ground when
they were dropped and so on and so forth
however it could not explain
certainly not adequately
things like
modern day examples of gravitational
lensing or the existence of neutron
stars or black holes or the precession
of orbits or gravitational waves or if
you want to get really fancy lens
thuring frame dragging which is where
space-time itself is literally dragged
by a massive body when it's rotating
much less all the stuff that couldn't
even be imagined in the previous
paradigm you know the previous idea of
how physics worked gravity as well as
space and time you couldn't even imagine
things like the relativity of
simultaneity length contraction and time
dilation so all those phenomena amount
to predictions of a kind given general
relativity arising out of a far more
detailed explanation of the nature of
gravity in general relativity over
newtonian gravity which was less
detailed its general relativity sticks
its neck out in many directions or you
can think modern medicine compared to
folk or ancient or pseudoscientific
nostrums drink this herbal tea or wear
this magic pendant to ward off your
illness is one thing one level of
non-explanation so to speak but take
this paracetamol because it inhibits
prostaglandin synthesis preventing the
creation of enzymes that cause pain
receptors to be activated is something
else entirely especially when it works
more often than not over those nostrums
okay back to the book and david writes
i have already remarked that even in
science most criticism does not consist
of experimental testing that is because
most scientific criticism is directed
not at a theory's predictions but
directly at the underlying explanations
testing the predictions is just an
indirect way albeit an exceptionally
powerful one when available
of testing the explanations in chapter
one i gave the example of the grass cure
the theory that eating a kilogram of
grass is a cure for the common cold
that theory and an infinity of others of
the same milk are readily testable but
we can criticize and reject them without
bothering to do any experiments purely
on the grounds that they explain no more
than the prevailing theories which they
contradict yet make new unexplained
assertions the stages of a scientific
discovery shown in figure 3.3 are seldom
completed in sequence at the first
attempt there is usually repeated
backtracking before each stage is
completed or rather solved for each
stage may present a problem whose
solution itself requires all five stages
of a subsidiary problem-solving process
just pausing there um yes so my
reflection on this is that that scheme
or any scheme that you want to write out
is subject to revision and modification
within actual science as it's practiced
and so there's no real method of science
you're taught this in school follow the
scientific method people talk about the
scientific method the method is if there
is one way of doing things in one way of
reaching discovery we know this isn't
true because we all know stories of
so-called serendipity and science i
think too much is often made of
serendipity the people that make the
biological breakthroughs are often
biologists and that's not mere luck that
they're biologists they have made the
conscious choice to go into that area
but you speak to biologists about famous
cases for example the discovery of
penicillin let's say it's the trope
example
where
luck was apparently involved and how
does luck feature into this scientific
method well the scientific method really
is about the methods of criticism
putting all that aside i remember one of
the first essays i ever wrote on the
philosophy of science was in response to
a question which i cannot remember what
the question was
about
the logic of scientific discovery
popper's first book and
it's not a great inroad to um popper's
work as i think i might have commented
on here before it's very technical it's
dense it's not particularly an enjoyable
read like so many of his other ones are
they're so much more clear and
especially as a person who was very new
to philosophy
reading any kind of philosophy was a bit
of a struggle but
in my essay i did manage to conclude
that in a sense popper's own title of
his work
was
in a sense misleading because there was
no logic to scientific discovery if you
by what you mean by logic is something
more like a deductive process of course
he calls it a hypothetical deductive
process because it's um it's kind of the
use of what's called modus tollens which
is where you well it's refutation okay
if if the theory leads to a particular
prediction and the prediction turns out
to be false then the theory can churn
itself to be false but whatever the case
it's not like you're putting
observations in at the front of this
scientific method and getting out the
end scientific theories
that kind of program just doesn't work
so what you're taught in school about
write down your observations and at the
end of it reach a conclusion
no that you have to start with a guess
of some sort and the guess should be an
explanation of some kind but when i
wrote this essay happily for me the
professor seemed to agree the point here
is that david is pointing out what
popper does that creativity
in science
is messy and not formulaic there are
heuristics that one might apply of
course experimental testing is essential
to the whole project of demarcating
science from everything else but you're
going to go back and forth between these
stages of
what might be referred to as
cycles of creativity and criticism and
only at the end of all these cycles
might you get something called
scientific knowledge at the end of it
like looking at the the scheme here
we've got
the five stages
problem well number one how do we know
that we've got a problem in the first
place that takes a certain amount of
creativity of recognizing of seeing
before you you have a theory and you
have an observation and these things
don't seem to agree with each other
but you have to creatively conjecture
what's going on before you as to whether
or not that really is a problem or
whether or not you've simply made a
mistake which is still a problem
two step two is more creativity
conjecturing a solution this can be the
hardest part of all the entire
scientific exercise that even if you do
find this problem
then being able to solve the problem
well that's a whole other step that's a
whole other level
many many physicists might have observed
that mercury's orbit wasn't being
correctly predicted by newtonian gravity
they could all agree and check for
themselves that this prediction seemed
to be inaccurate and they were coming up
with conjectured solutions some of which
included other planets that were yet to
be observed perturbing the orbit of
mercury but it took the genius of
einstein to solve it
lots of scientists might have thought
how do we have this diversity of species
on the planet is there this thing called
evolution but it took the genius of
darwin to figure out this thing called
natural selection evolution by natural
selection
so on and so forth when we get to part
three and i'm going to mention more on
this later we've got criticism including
experimental tests that can require an
equal amount of creativity simply
devising the experiment can be one of
the hardest parts of this entire
enterprise i asked david a question
about this actually one of my questions
for david and he talked about how yes
you know
people underestimate just how difficult
some experiments can be
to do so anyway all this entire scheme
this one through five scheme all of it
requires
a significant amount of creativity
there's no formula to it and you're
going to go backwards and forwards
between thinking there's a problem
recognizing perhaps there's not a
problem thinking there's a problem again
coming up with a solution realizing the
solution doesn't seem to work because
you've conjectured a particular kind of
criticism and the criticism has been
valid or invalid and so it goes i mean
it can be a very messy process which of
course or brings us to the idea that
scientists and scientific progress
needs time
it can't be this
standard kind of a job that other people
might be in where you're
working in a factory and you're doing a
similar thing over and over again day
after day or even in the media where
you're uh just reporting on things that
you
see in front of you and coming up with a
story and the the the stories are gonna
move on tomorrow so it doesn't matter if
you made a mistake yesterday you just
keep moving forward moving forward
moving forward
but science can't be
quite like that you know it's very
difficult to
try and eke out a little bit of truth in
the mess of falsehoods and errors that
you're surrounded with that can be hard
and so david talks a lot about this this
going backwards and forwards but i'm
going to skip
most of that part where he discusses
this
moving between the stages that he has
here except to mention that um also he
talks about um stage three there
which is so important with the the idea
of criticism here in science you might
need to invent new modes of criticism
there might have to be a new way of
coming up with a scientific theory as i
flagged earlier and so that can just be
extremely difficult to do and
that can lead to sub-problems the
sub-problem of how to come up with the
new experiment how to figure out how to
solve the problems in the experiment so
often in physics at least it's very
difficult to see the effect that you
want to see the the famous
mickelson-morley experiment to try and
detect
the so-called ether this material
through which light waves would
propagate it used among other things an
interferometer now forgetting putting
aside exactly what the experiment
sought to establish and failed to
establish the existence of the ethos
this thing or the either wind rather
just trying to set the whole thing up to
get it to work in the first place the
engineering problems were so difficult i
think the entire experiment had to sit
in a bath of mercury liquid mercury and
because it's an interferometer it's
looking at interference effects with
light that's extremely difficult i
trust me from experience that you try
and do experiments on the interference
of light and it's very difficult to see
let alone measure
what's going on it's a very subtle
effect so much in physics it's about
subtle effects difficult to observe
effects and to pick them up you often
need to invent new instrumentation or
faster computers you know my own um
very very modest inroads into doing a
kind of experiment required me to figure
out whether or not these two particular
galaxies were going to merge or pass
through one another and the number of
parameters that you needed to change for
each galaxy
kind of
ballooned exponentially the more
accurate you wanted your prediction to
be and in particular the more stars you
had in your simulated galaxies the
higher the computing power that you
needed which again is
more ways of changing the experiment and
so more creativity is required in order
to
try and use a slower computer in order
to figure out what an otherwise faster
computer might have been able to tell
you and so this is kind of a
sub problem so i'll pick it up where
david says quote
not only is there constant backtracking
but the many subproblems all remain
simultaneously active and and are
addressed opportunistically it is only
when the discovery is complete that a
fairly sequential argument in a pattern
something like figure 3.3 can be
presented
it can begin with the latest and best
version of the problem then it can show
how some of the rejected theories fail
criticism then it can set out the
winning theory and say why it survives
criticism then it can explain how one
copes without the superseded theory and
finally can point out some of the new
problems that this discovery creates or
allows for while the problem is still in
the process of being solved we are
dealing with a large heterogeneous set
of ideas theories and criteria with many
variants of each all competing for
survival there is a continual turnover
of theories as they are altered or
replaced by new ones
so all the theories are being subjected
to variation and selection according to
criteria which are themselves subject to
variation and selection the whole
process resembles biological evolution a
problem is like an ecological niche and
a theory is like a gene or a species
which is being tested for viability in
that niche or niche
variants of theories like genetic
mutations are continually being created
and less successful variants become
extinct when more successful variants
take over success is the ability to
survive repeatedly under the selective
pressures criticisms brought to bear in
that niche and the criteria for that
criticism depend partly on the physical
characteristics of the niche and partly
on the attributes of other genes and
species i.e other ideas that are already
present there the new world view may be
implicit in a theory that solves a
problem and the distinctive feature of a
new species that it takes over a niche
are emergent properties of the problem
or niche in other words obtaining
solutions is inherently complex there is
no simple way of discovering the true
nature of planets given say a critique
of the celestial sphere theory and some
additional observations just as there is
no single way of designing the dna of a
koala bear given the properties of
eucalyptus trees i'm just pausing um i
know any australians listening to this
will book the idea of a kuala bear we
are metaphorically bashed over the head
as children
that koalas are not bears but um
we can forgive this the use is kind of
like teddy bear i mean a teddy is not a
bear either so
but nonetheless i think it's um quite
fine to use that terminology going on
david writes
quote evolution or trial and error
especially the focused purposeful form
of trial and error called scientific
discovery are the only ways
for this reason popper called his theory
that knowledge can grow only by
conjecture and refutation in the manner
of figure 3.3 an evolutionary
epistemology this is an important
unifying insight and we shall see that
there are other connections between
these two strands
what are the strands
just to me here
the strands are epistemology and
biological evolution or evolution by
natural selection okay but david goes on
to say quote but i do not want to
overstate the similarities between
scientific discovery and biological
evolution for there are important
differences too one difference is that
in biology variations or mutations are
random blind purposeless while in human
problem solving the creation of new
conjectures is itself a complex
knowledge-laden process driven by the
intentions of the people concerned
perhaps an even more important
difference is that there is no
biological equivalent of arguments
all conjectures have to be tested
experimentally which is one reason why
biological evolution is slower and less
efficient by an astronomically large
factor pausing there i'm just my
reflection on that or just rather my
emphasis here
because
conjectures which in biology amount to
gene mutations
must themselves be tested individually
so each time an organism the variation
between organisms within a species
amount to a kind of
gene mutation
from one species to another each of them
gets tested in the environment and
because each of them are getting tested
tested by the measure that the organism
itself does not survive so it goes
through its natural life or whatever
okay which usually some years
that's a very slow process but as david
has been painst to say here
we
criticize explanations without ever
needing to actually test them
necessarily in the real world so often
whereas biological evolution only ever
does that testing in the real world okay
we can we can cut through and just look
at the quality of the explanation rather
than constructing the experiment which
as i've just said and explained itself
is a creative process which requires
quite a lot of effort to do it's not
trivial to do especially these days
scientific experiments back to the book
nevertheless
the link between these two sorts of
process
is far more than mere analogy they are
two of my four intimately related main
strands of explanation of the fabric of
reality both in science and in
biological evolution evolutionary
success depends on the creation and
survival of objective knowledge which in
biology is called adaptation that is the
ability of a theory or a gene to survive
in a niche is not a haphazard function
of its structure but depends on whether
enough true and useful information about
the niche is implicitly or explicitly
encoded there i shall say more about
this in chapter eight okay now i'm
skipping a small amount
and i'm going to where david says quote
take a moment to compare figures 3.1 and
3.3
look how different these two conceptions
of the scientific process are
inductivism is observation and
prediction based whereas in reality
science is problem and explanation based
inductivism supposes that theories are
somehow extracted or distilled from
observations or are justified by them
whereas in fact theories begin as
unjustified conjectures in someone's
mind which typically precede the
observations that rule out rival
theories
inductivism seeks to justify predictions
as likely to hold in the future
problem-solving justifies an explanation
as being better than other explanations
available in the present
inductivism is a dangerous and recurring
source of many sorts of error because it
is superficially so plausible but it is
not true
i'll say that again
inductivism is a dangerous and recurring
source of many sorts of errors because
it is superficially so plausible
okay and then david goes on to say quote
when we succeed in solving a problem
scientific or otherwise we end up with a
set of theories which though they are
not problem free we find preferable to
the theories we started with
what new attributes the new theories
will have therefore depends on what we
saw as the deficiencies in our in our
original theories that is on what the
problem was
science is characterized by its problems
as well as by its method astrologers who
solve the problem of how to cast more
intriguing horoscopes without risking
being proved wrong are unlikely to have
created much that deserves to be called
scientific knowledge even if they have
used genuine scientific methods such as
market research and are themselves quite
satisfied with the solution
the problem in genuine science is always
to understand that some aspect of the
fabric of reality by finding
explanations that are as broad and deep
and as true and specific as possible
when we think that we have solved a
problem we naturally adopt our new set
of theories in preference to the old set
that is why science regarded as
explanation seeking and problem solving
raises no problem of induction there is
no mystery about why we should feel
compelled tentatively to accept an
explanation when it is the best
explanation we can think of
end quote end of the chapter there isn't
that brilliant there in that last
paragraph we have encapsulated so much
which is in the beginning of infinity so
much that it's in popper's work so much
that today motivates people who follow
in this particular mold of the way in
which we understand how knowledge is
created
science
is
the
process the methodology of science
science its very self seems to be
debased denuded of its character
by people who see it as a purely
predictive exercise and again as i've
said before
this seems to happen only in physics i
mean it's not like the geologists are
out there only concerned about
predicting
what minerals are where what rocks are
where they want to understand why
they're there in the first place
astrophysicists want to understand why
it is that galaxies have the shapes that
they do why it is in cosmology the
universe is behaving the way that it is
whether it's going to expand forever and
accelerating rates or what's going to
happen in the future and why what is the
nature of this dark energy not that it's
just there and it's causing this
particular phenomena and that particular
fundamental allows us to make a
prediction the prediction is only a
small part
of what we're really interested in
science we're interested in in
understanding reality which requires
good hard to vary explanations and
that's all here another way of putting
that is of course it's about problem
solving
okay so that's where i'll end it today
thank you to all of my supporters if
you'd like to join them in supporting
the podcast then look up patreon topcast
or go to
bretthall.org where there is a donate
button
now i'll just leave you before i say
goodbye
with a final quote from david deutscher
about the centrality of problems not
merely to science but to the entire
project of knowledge creation and the
search for good explanations until next
time bye-bye
and with problems that we are not aware
of yet the ability to put right not the
sheer good luck of avoiding indefinitely
is our only hope not just of solving
problems but of survival
so
take two stone tablets
and carve on them
on one of them
carve problems are soluble
and on the other one carve
problems are inevitable
thank you
you